---
modified: 21/07/2025
---
## PTQ

- PTQ purpose
	- Request clarification / confirmation
	- Request submissions
	- Post tender variations 
		- Small VO can be waited till award
		- Big VO need PTQ or retender
- PTQ pitfall
	- Manipulation of supplementary information
	- Introduction of new quantities
	- Unfairness to conforming tenderers
	- Counter-offer
- Principle
	- Tender Sum not to be changed if the tendering basis has not been change, otherwise DQ
	- Confidential queries and replies

## PTQ Question

- Standard - lump sum
	- You are required to confirm you are fully aware that this is a lump sum tender based on Drawings and Specifications, you are required to complete the Works based on the submitted lump sum. Any items not priced, left blank or marked with "Inlcuded", "-", "N/A", "NIL" in the Schedule of Quantities and Rates are deemed to be included in the rate of other items and anything stipulated / qualified in the Schedule of Quantities and Rates shall not be considered and the quantities inserted in the Schedule of Quantities and Rates are at the sole risk of the tenderer, the lump sum tender shall not be adjusted in this respect except the provisional sums (if any), provisional quantities (if any) and those as described in the tender document. You are required to confirm that you have acknowledged the above requirements and all the time and costs implication have been included in your submitted tender.
- Standard - full compliance
	- You are request to confirm that your tender is in full compliance with all the terms and conditions stipulated in the Tender Documents and all the Tender Addendum issued.
- Missing document submission
	- Please submit the following outstanding tender information required by clause xx of Conditions of Tender for evaluation:
- Arithmetical error
	- Your submitted Tender Sum contains the following arithmetical errors: -
		- The total of SOR Item xxxx shall be xxxx in lieu of xxxx
	- The total accumulated error of the above is xxxx more than the corrected tender sum. Please see the Attachment A.
	- Please acknowledge the above arithmetical errors, and confirm you will abide by the Tender Sums notwithstanding the above arithmetical errors.
	- As the above accumulated error at (+)0.16% of the arithmetically corrected tender sum of xxx minus the total of all Preliminaries amount and pre-priced items is lesser than 0.25% as stipulated in clause xx of Conditions of Tender, please confirm no adjustment will be made to the tendered prices and rates.
- Copying error
	- Referring to your submitted tender, the unit rate for SOR Item xxxx on page xxxx is considered as a copying error. Please confirm the unit rate shall be xxxx in lieu of xxxx. Please see the Attachment B.
	- Please acknowledge the above copying error, and confirm that this will not affect your submitted Tender.
- High rate - propose
	- Referring to your submitted tender, the following rates are considered high. Please review and propose a reasonable unit rate for future valuation of variations.
- High rate - assessed rate
- Low rate - confirm compliance
- Missing rate
	- You have not piced xxxx in SOR Item xxxx. Please: -
	- (1) confirm the works as stipulated in the Drawings and Specifications have been included in your submitted tender sum.
	- (2) provide unit rate for future valuation of variations.
- Request rate for variation
	- Please provide the following unit rates for future valuation of variation
- TA not incorporated
	- You have not incorporated Addendum No.X for the page xxx. Please acknowledge this error and confirm you will abide by your submitted tender sum.
- No breakdown
	- Please submit the cost breakdown for Schedule No.1 - Preliminaries.
	- Referring to your submitted tender, no cost breakdown for SOR Item xxxx "xxxx". Please submit the cost breakdown for this item.
- Withdraw qualification
- Post tender variation - works
	- The Employer is considering to use xxxx in lieu of xxxx (SOR Item xxxx).
	- Please submit the cost and time implications to the tender using "xxxx" in lieu of "xxxx" (SOR Item xxxx) stipulated to the original Tender Documents.
- Post tender variation - requirement
	- As discussed in the tender interview on xxxx, please confirm if your tender is successful you will not claim for any loss and / or expense including but not limited to loss of profit on any potential omission variations to be inititated by the Employer after the award of this Contract for value engineering purposes.
- Draw attention to requirement
	- Your particular attention is drawn to clause xx of xxxx that xxxx
	- Please confirm your full compliance with these clauses and that you have made due allowance in your tender for xxxx.

### PTQ for revised rebar details *(2020 D1Q4)*

- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Additional rebar details</mark>
	- Would <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">one week</mark> be sufficient for the tenderer to measure the additional re-bar details? Should be more  time be given to the tenderer for review and reply?
	- Has the QS formed <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">any view as to the differences</mark> between the provisional quantities and full re-bar details? If there is possible saving, why ask for no cost implication? If there is possible addition, it would <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">not be fair to the tenderer to ask for no cost implication</mark>
	- If QS has not formed any view yet and if the tenderer can readily accept no cost implication, it may mean that the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">provisional quantities are very generous</mark>. This will be to the Employer's disadvantages. QS may be blamed if the Employer discovers later that the provisional quantities are generous.
	- Has the Employer insisted that there should be no cost and time implications? The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Employer should accept if the tenderer refuses to accept no cost</mark> and time implications since there are in fact additional rebar details.
	- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">If the Employer accepts giving more time</mark> for tenderer to review and reply and accepts cost and time adjustments, then the above problems can be resolved, but he may need to <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">involve the second lowest tenderer as a fallback choice</mark>.
	- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">If the Employer does not want to defer</mark> the award, then a better arrangement without putting unnecessary risk on either party is to issue the additional rebar details and request the tenderer to <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">confirm that the tendered unit rates</mark> and committed construction period are still valid considering any complexity or additional quantities introduced by the additional rebar details. The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">provisional quantities</mark> may be adjusted to cover any possible addition but are still subject to final remeasurement.
	- Bonus: as the latest drawings are still being review, <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">further revisions may be required</mark>. Changing the provisional quantities now to lump sums may still be subject to future variations
	- Bonus: should the question be restricted to additional rebar details? Do the drawings contain other revisions apart from the additional rebar details? The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">scope and extent of revisions</mark> would need to be assessed.

## PTA

- To change the original tendering basis
- Tender Sum may need to be changed

## Tender Interview

- QS no participation in tender price negotiation, leave it solely to Employer
- Order
	- Less attractive tender first so that matters arising can be discussed with lowest more thoroughly
	- Slightly adjust order to avoid tenderers from knowing rank
- Agenda
	- Introduction of attendees
	- Architect introduce the site and scope of works including site constraint , difficulty
	- Confirmation of contract prices and period
	- Tenderer's presentation
		- Site organization, programme, method statement, site layout
	- Employer's clarification
		- Project expectation or objectives
		- Special terms or specification requirements
	- Tenderer's clarification
		- Qualification, error, unreasonable rates
	- Post tender variations
		- Additional / varied requirements
	- Other questions & time for reply

