---
modified: 21/07/2025
---
- What is BIM?
	- "Building Information Modeling (BIM) is the process of generating and managing building data during its life cycle. Typically it uses three-dimensional, real-time, dynamic building modeling software to increase productivity in building design and construction. The process produces the BIM, which encompasses building geometry, spatial relationships, geographic information, and quantities and properties of building components." - HKIBIM
- Application in QS
	- Produce SOR automatically
	- Enhance accuracy and speed of quantity taking off  
	- Automatically accommodate changes of design to quantity taking off and SOR
	- Thus, facilitate QS's tasks including cost estimate, cost study, BQ preparation, IP valuation, estimate and valuation of variations, final account
- Current obstacles of application
	- Lack of surplus fund to procure BIM software and supporting hardware
	- Lack of experienced users
	- Lack of training of new users and high off-job and on-job training costs
	- Potential users too busy to spare time to learn and practice
	- Software not mature enough to meet QS's need
	- Years and amount of return on investment not certain
	- Design consultants not using BIM yet
	- Efficient and effective mode of transfer or collaboration of models between different consultants not established yet
	- All consultants are used to work alone
- Consideration when using BIM qty
	- For BQ or bulk checking
	- Latest BIM based on tender dwg
	- Classified and named in according with SMM & functional area
	- Measured in according with SMM
	- Items not measured but required by SMM
	- Further adjustment of date, e.g. weight of steel
	- Clash of model resolved

### RFI & care when using qty from BIM *(2020 D1Q3b*


- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Query to general notes (in RFI format)</mark>
	- Characteristic strength of ribbed steel reinforcing bars weaker than plain reinforcing bars?
	- Missing 12mm and 16mm diameters of rebars in the alp length table?
	- 35mm diameter of rebars shown in the lap length table should be 32mm?
	- Lap length of reinforcement in the table: TL (anchorage length under tension) less than CL (anchorage length under compression)?
	- Concrete grades of beam and slab far greater than those of column and structural wall / parapet wall?
	- Concrete grade of footing same as non-structural normal?
	- Concrete grade of mass concrete fill C15/20 far below normal?
	- Concrete grade of structural wall / parapet wall less than non-structural elements?
	- Concrete grade of lift shaft far less than water tank?
	- Which concrete locations are waterproofing construction?
	- Concrete cover: cast against soil less than on blinding?
	- Concrete cover for 120 mins FRR less than that for 60 min FRR
	- What are the FRR requirements for the steel structure and its FRR painting
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Quantity of struct steel & bolts generated from BIM</mark>
	- For the dimensional parts of the type names, are they in compliance with which naming standard? For the last dimensions, which are the kg/m and which are the thickness of the members? In case of kg/m, are the full details of the sectional sizes available from the naming standard? In case of thickness, should both webs and flanges (e.g. rolled steel channel RSC) be stated according to the naming standard?
	- Are the lengths the overall end-to-end cut-lengths of each member counted? Lengths are missing from rolled equal angle EA, rolled steel channel RSC and universal column UC.
	- For circular hollow section CHS 150x150x12.5, what is meant by 150x150?
	- For steel plate PL 200x200, if 200x200 means the cross section, it is unreasonably thick.
	- For square hollow section, SHS 150x150x125, 125 is too big for kg/m or thickness
	- The types represent the sectional types. Can the members be further classified by their functional names like: columns, beams, bracings, purlins, and cladding rails, grillages, built-up columns, built-up trusses and griders?
	- Are all the members straight, and not castellated, tapered, curved or cambered?
	- Are all connection plates included?
	- What are the locations and more details description of the bolts given in the schedule of quantities, while noting that "all steel structure shall be connected with 10,mm fillet weld all round" as stated in General Note?
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Care to be exercised</mark>
	- The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">classification and naming</mark> conventions should be sufficient for QS to refer to the dwg and spec to classify and fully describe the shape, dimension, materials and workmanship, etc <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">according to HKSMM</mark>
	- The length given should be <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">overall end-to-end cut-length</mark> of each piece of steel member
	- The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">weight</mark> per m can be looked up from standard tables or calculated based on the names or sectional sizes given in schedule of quantities
	- More <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">detailed schedule showing individual members with their locational references</mark> should be provided to enable checking for <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">more detailed classification or descriptions according to HKSMM</mark> and to enable checking of no overlap or shortage or omission of members in the model or the summary schedule
	- A <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">decision</mark> has to be made as to <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">whether to adopt</mark> the schedule of quantities for BQ quantities. If the schedule of quantities is found to be trustworthy, the quantities may be converted with suitable adjustments for use as BQ quantities. If the schedule is too crude, the quantities <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">may only be used for bulk checking</mark>. A floor by floor analysis would be useful for bulk checking 

