---
modified: 03/08/2025
---
## Contract Provision

- Date for Possession can be the same as / different from Commencement Date
- Commencement Date: commencement of the works not contract
- Difference between "of" & "for"
	- of: actual date
	- for: tentative date
- Postponement or suspension
	- AI (cl. 23.3)
	- EOT (cl. 25.1(3) (j) & (i))
	- L&E (cl. 27.1(2) (e) & (i))
	- Determination (cl. 36.1(d) & (e), 37.1) - 120 days

## Partial Possession (cl.18) 

- Definition (cl.1.6)
	- Relevant Date: date of E's partial possession
	- Relevant Part
		- Define area
		- Define scope of works including permanent and temporary for each section 
- Procedure (cl.18.1)
	- Consent of Contractor 
	- Archi issue Certificate with estimate of approx total value for the relevant part
	- Relevant work can be a variation under cl.1.6
	- Employer take possession
		- SC of that portion (cl.18.3\)
		- DLP of that portion begin
		- Insurance of that portion cease, Employer to arrange separate insurance
		- LD of that portion end (cl.18.4)
		- Retention of that portion release half
		- Release liability for damage by specified peril (cl.18.5)
	- Final Certificate after Defects Rectification Certificate of the remaining
- Benefit
	- Earlier occupation of portion
	- MC relieve LD pressure and get back some retention for cash flow
- Concern
	- Claim for EOT & LE for additional cost and disruption
	- VO for imposing restriction
	- Extra cost for 
		- Access arrangement
		- Erection / maintain / removal of temporary works for hoarding, protection works, security arrangement
		- Reinstatement of permanent work after removal
		- Relocation of temporary stores, site offices, plant, temporary lighting and power supply
		- Logistics difficulties
		- Re-sequencing work to suit early possession
		- Extra health and safety measures
		- Temporary occupation permit if any
	- Insurance arrangement - Employer's insurance on property
	- Retention & LAD adjustment
	- Reduction of bond if any
	- DLP defined by SFBC if not specify
	- Arrangement of defect rectification work 
	- Final T&C for E&M close to completion of whole works

### Amendment to SP for partial possession *(2010 D1Q2)*

- Sectional completion and early handover
- Indication of <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">extent</mark> of relevant portion with reference to drawing
- Any <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">special requirements</mark> related to the sectional completion: e.g. re-positioning of and additional <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">hoardings</mark>, re-routing of <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">access</mark> to the site after sectional completion
- Early completion of any <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">major equipment</mark> which may be located outside the are of the ground floor but need to be activated in order to enable the completed parts to function: e.g. early completion of the chillers
- Provision for <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">re-sequencing</mark> of the works and disruptions due to completion in sections
- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Insurance</mark> arrangement for section completed earlier and people working there
- Other requirements affected by the changes

### Early possession of part (2019 D2Q4b)

- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Early possession of completed work</mark>
	- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">SFBC</mark>
		- Cl.18.1(1) - Employer may, with Contractor's <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">consent</mark>, take possession of a part of the works, i.e. relevant part, before completion of the works
		- Cl.18.1(2) - Architect shall issue a certificate identifying the scope of the relevant part, giving relevant date for possession and stating the estimated amount of the relevant part
		- Cl.18.2 - substantial completion of the relevant part shall be deemed to have occurred on the relevant date and the following shall take effect:
			- Commencement of DLP
			- Exemption from liability for damage by specified peril
			- Release of retention on-half relating to the relevant part
		- Cl.2.1(1)(h) - Contractor's responsibility for the care of relevant part shall cease 14 days after possession
	- Although partial possession would not cause any overall delay, MC may <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">incur additional costs</mark> arising from the following:
		- Provision of <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">temporary measures to separate</mark> between Section 2A and 2B, in the form of hoarding, fencing, directory sign, etc.
		- Provision of <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">temporary separate accesses</mark> to Section 2A and 2B, and provision of protection, signage, security, etc along the accesses
		- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Risk and insurance for other people using access</mark> passing through Section 2B still in construction to Section 2A in operation
		- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Maintenance and final removal of temporary measures and reinstatement of permanent work</mark>
		- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Relocation</mark> of any temporary stores, site offices, plant, temporary lighting and power supply, etc.
		- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Difficulties with logistics on site</mark>, <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">re-sequencing</mark> of work to suit the early possession of Section 2A
		- Provision of other appropriate <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">health and safety measures</mark> to deal with risks and nuisance caused by work in Section 2B to Section 2A
	- While the clause regarding partial possession have not specifically dealt with the occurrence of the above costs, the relevant work <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">can be put forward as a variation</mark> under Contract as the definition of variation is wide enough to cover any imposition of an obligation or restriction instructed by Architect regarding access, working space, limitation of working hours, and sequence of work according to <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.1.6 </mark>
	- In case of SFBC, Contractor would have a better chance to negotiate a complete deal with all the required measures stipulated because of the need for the Contractor's consent

### Sectional completion / Partial possession *(2023 D1Q3)* 

- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Having residential blocks completed earlier</mark>
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Feasibility</mark>
		- To have the residential blocks completed before the completion of the office blocks, it should first <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">physically be feasible</mark> in terms of the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">durations</mark>, and in terms of no or very little <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">dependency</mark> by the residential blocks on the office blocks.
		- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">SFBC</mark> have provisions for sectional completion of the Works whereby different sections of the Works are required to be completed by different completion date or date for completion
		- All sections are governed by the same provisions for EOT and LAD for delay
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Draft tender doc</mark>
		- If it is physically feasible, then it is a matter of <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">defining</mark> the respective <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">scope of works</mark>, specifying two <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">completion dates</mark> with earlier one for the residential blocks, and different <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">rates of LAD</mark> for delay to respective completion in the tender documents.
		- It is expected the residential blocks and office blocks are <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">priced separately</mark> in the tender submission. Any other part of the works that should be included in the earlier section for the residential blocks should also be priced separately.
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Operation</mark>
		- If a section of the Works is completed late beyond the extended completion date, <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">LAD</mark> can be imposed.
		- The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">programme</mark> should reflect the sectional completion requirements. The statutory <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">inspection times for OP</mark> will be different.
		- The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">substantial completion</mark> of a section shall be certified by Architect, and the Employer can then take over the section for use and occupation.
		- Half of the relevant <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">retention</mark> shall be released upon substantial completion of a section.
		- Each section have its own <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">DLP and defects rectification certificate</mark> after completion of defects rectification.
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Take possession once completed</mark>
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Feasibility</mark>
		- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">In theory</mark>, <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contractor would like</mark> to hand over any section of the Works to the Employer once completed
		- Assuming that the Employer wants to take possession before the residential blocks can be fully certified as substantially completed, <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">SFBC</mark> clause 18 permits this and calls this "<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Partial Possession</mark>" of part of the Works or part of a section of the Works. However this requires the Contractor's <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">consent</mark>. 
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Draft tender doc</mark>
		- It may be <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">amended by a special conditions</mark> of contract that no consent is required.
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Operation</mark>
		- Once the possession is taken, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Architect has to certify</mark> that the part taken over shall be deemed to have been <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">substantially completed</mark>
		- Employer will be responsible for the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">care</mark> of the part taken over
		- Rate of <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">LAD</mark> shall be reduced in proportion to the value of the part taken over
		- Half of relevant <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">retention</mark> related to the value of the part taken over shall be released
		- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">DLP</mark> shall start and finish early correspondingly

### Commencement as usual and delay possession *(2023 D2Q1a)*

- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">A. Follow original Contract Commencement Date</mark> 
	- PM suggested that the original Contract Commencement Date should be followed and an EOT would then be granted to cover the postponement of possession of the site from 1/3/2020 - 14/3/2021.
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Pros</mark>
		- Generally, a significant revision of the commencement date can be considered as a change to one of the <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">fundamental</mark> terms and conditions of a contract. The Contractor may argue that he has the right not to accept the change, but treat the contract as <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">invalidated</mark>. Since <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">clause 25.1(3)(j)(ii) permits extension of time</mark> for completion due to this revision, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">argument should not stand</mark>, but keeping the Commencement Date unchanged can at least avoid this argument. (Bonus: Changing the Commencement Date of the Works or site possession date would not invalidate the Contract, and all the contract terms and conditions should remain intact)
		- Postponement of the Contract Commencement Date shall have both <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">contractual and financial implications</mark>. Clause <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">25.1(3)(j)(ii)</mark> permits EOT for completion. Clause <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">27.1(2)(e)(ii)</mark> permits compensation of direct loss and expense. Clause <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">36.1(1)(d)</mark> permits the Contractor to determine his employment if the postponement of the Commencement Date is 120 days or more. Therefore, keeping the Commencement Date unchanged appears to be able to avoid all these implications.
		- If the original Contract Commencement Date is followed, there is no change to the terms and conditions of the awarded Contract. This provides <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">certainty to the arrangement of the Works at the beginning</mark> of the project. This can avoid the Contractor's argument that he is only obliged to start any work or services forming part of the Works starting from the Contract Commencement Date (an argument on the incorrect assumption that the Contract Commencement Date is equal to the date of commencement of the Contract; "Contract Commencement Date" should more properly mean the original date for commencement of the Works, not the Contract)
		- With the Contract Commencement Date followed, the Contractor has to <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">comply with his obligations</mark> under the Contract, which is in the interest of the project. For instance, the Contractor can carry out <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">coordination</mark> with the Architect, other consultants, sub-contractors, specialist contractors, statutory undertakers, etc., <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">shop drawing submissions, statutory applications</mark>, etc. (Bonus: <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contractor can still be required to do so if the Contract Commencement Date is not followed</mark>.)
		- There will be no need to deal with or <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">negotiate</mark> the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">postponement of the Contract Commencement Date</mark> (Bonus: However, there will still be a need to deal with the contractual and financial implications of<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;"> postponement of site possession</mark>, which are very similar. A possible difference is that there is no clause like clause 36.1(1)(d) permitting the Contractor to determine his employment. Clause 36.1(1) does not mention "possession". However, clause <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">36.1(1)(e)</mark> permits the Contractor to determine his employment due to suspension of the carrying out of the Works for 120 days or more. Although it may be argued that suspension is different from possession, if commencement of the Works is deemed effective, suspension of the carrying out of the Works due to lack of site may also be considered as covered by clause 36.1(1)(e).)
		- Only the postponement of the site possession would need to be handled. The postponement may be implemented in a progressively incremental manner in light of the development of the pandemic. This may be more <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">flexible</mark> than postponing the Contract Commencement Date once and for all or in an incremental manner.
	- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Cons</mark>
		- The use of keeping the Contractor in place when the Contractor has no physical work to do appears to be not much. <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Additional loss and expense</mark> will be incurred if the Contractor is to keep some project staff during the period of no physical works.
		- If there is no negotiation regarding postponement of site possession, the Employer can only have the <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">knowledge about the Contractor's additional costs</mark> by the time the claim for loss and expense is submitted by the Contractor
	- Therefore, the pros as may be conceived by PM do not appear to be too many, but on balance, following the Contract Commencement Date would cause less room for argument.
	- What is more important is to <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">agree with the Contractor</mark> that the postponement would not trigger the determination clause.



