---
modified: 03/08/2025
---
## Architect's Instructions

- Architect's authority
    - As an agent
        - Issue instructions for Employer
    - As an independent certifier
        - Act independently and may not be directed by Employer
        - Owe duties to both Employer and Contractor
- Conditions of valid AI
	- From Architect
	- Time to issue (cl. 4.1)
	    - AI can be issued until Final Certificate
	    - No AI after DLP Cert
	- Only if empowered to issue (cl.4.1)
		- Not fundamentally change the scope or nature (cl.13.1(1)(c))
	    - No authority to vary Conditions of Contract
	    - No authority to direct time, method statement
	    - No authority to direct time, method statement
	    - No deletion of works for others to do (unless MC's written consent) (cl.13.1(1)(b))
	    - Temporary works
	    - Works outside contract
	- Formality
		- No specified format 
			- Shall no abuse the function of documents like site memo, email, letter
		- Written instruction (cl.4.2(1))
		- Oral instruction (cl. 4.2(2))
		    - Contractor no obligation to comply
		    - Shall be confirmed in writing within 5 days
		    - If Variation, confirm within 7 days, if not dissented by Archi in 7 days, effect on the expiry of the latter 7 days
- Compliance (cl. 4.3)
    - As soon as practical even if disagreement
    - Fail to begin to comply within 7 days
	    - Architect certify
		    - Cannot engage others based on AI alone
	    - Employer engage others
	    - Cost deduct from Contract Sum
- Contractor's disagreement (cl.4.3(2))
	- Settlement of dispute under clause 41
	- Still need to comply first (cl.41.8)
	- Might request Architect to correct first
- AI not necessarily involves Variation

## Rights and Obligations

- Contractor's right and obligation
	- Compliance with AI (cl.4.3)
		- If disagree, resolve under cl.41
		- No contractual right for having VO confirmed and agreed before commencement of the AI works, unless AI is illegal or invalid.
	- Right of reasonable rejection (cl.13.1(1)(a))
	    - If Variation on restriction on access to site, use of any part of the site or limitation of working space or working hours
	- Consent required to omit and give to others (cl.13.1(1)(b))
	- No start of Variation works without AI except emergency (cl.13.1(3))
	- QS to permit MC to be present when doing site measurement (cl.13.6)
	- Arbitration for disputed instruction (cl.41.5(e))
- Archi & QS 
	- Act reasonably and expeditiously (2005 cl.1.11(1) / 2006 cl.1.12)
		- Act independently and may not be directed by Employer
	- Architect issue AI requiring Variation (cl.13.1)
	- QS to do valuation (cl.13.4)
		- Archi has no authority to accept quotation from MC directly
- Employer's right
	- Engage others if Contractor fails to comply with AI, cost recoverable (cl.4.3(3))

## AI Power

- Circumstances of AI under SFBC
    - Resolve ambiguity (cl. 2.4) - VO, EOT, LE
    - Preventive works (cl. 4.4) - VO
        - Carry out without waiting, later AI
    - Resolve infringement of Statutory Requirements (cl. 6.2) - VO
    - Alternative material not of similar type (cl. 8.1) - VO
    - Testing, open up for inspection (cl. 8.2) - VO, EOT, LE
        - Unless in Contract; or
        - Works not in compliance; or
        - Failure of previous one; or
        - Works carried out without inspection notice required
    - Works not in compliance (cl. 8.3)
        - Acceptance - VO(-)
        - Alternative remedial work - VO(-)
    - Dismiss any individual (cl. 8.5)
    - Payment of royalties in compliance with AI (cl. 9.4) - VO
    - Replace construction manager for incompetence (cl.10.2(3))
    - Change required to design, quality or quantity or imposition of or change to any obligation or restriction on the Contractor (cl. 13.1) - VO, EOT, LE
    - Carry out works under Pro Qty / Items, expenditure of Pro Sum (cl. 13.2) - VO, EOT, LE
    - Error in Contract Bill (cl. 14.3) - VO
    - Rectifying defects 
	    - Before completion(cl. 8.4)
	    - During DLP (cl.17.3(2))
	    - Not to rectify (cl.17.3(5))
    - Postponement or suspension (cl. 23.3) - EOT, LE
    - Delay recovery measures (cl. 26.1 & 26.3)
    - Nominate NSC (cl. 29.1(1))
    - Nominate NSC using amended conditions (cl. 29.5) - VO
    - Fossil, antiquity or object (cl. 34.2) - EOT, LE
    - Remove off site after determination (cl.35.4(4), 36.3(3), 37.3(3))
    - Left MOS for completion of the Works after determination (cl.35.4(7), 36.3(5), 37.3(5))
    - Submit all documents for settlement of FA after determination (cl.35.7(2))
- Late AI - EOT, LE

### AI for sub-standard works *(2016 D2Q3a)*

- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Empower to issue AI</mark>
	- The Architect may instruct the Contractor to rectify <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">defects</mark> or remove and replace any materials, goods or work that are not in accordance with the Contract under SFBC <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.8.3(a)(b), 8.4</mark>.
	- The Contractor should first <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">check whether the alleged defects are really defects</mark>. If they are damage caused by persons first whether the alleged defeects are really defects, e.g. separate contractors employed directly by the Employer, he should report to the Architect for resolution.
	- If the Contractor accepts that they are really defects, he should investigate whether the defects can be rectified without replacement or the door handles need to be replaced. He should <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">agree with the Architect a rectification method at the minimum cost</mark>.
	- The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">supplier or sub-contractor causing the defects should be held liable</mark>. 
- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Time for comply with AI</mark>
	- After receiving the instruction, the Contractor should <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">comply with the Architect's instruction as soon as practicable</mark> under SFBC <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.4.3(1)</mark>
	- "as soon as practicble" means that regards must be given to both technical possibility and practicality taking account of all relevant facts of the circumstances, e.g. the time required to order new replacement materials. The Contractor may, therefore, have a ground for <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">challenging whether the stipulated time</mark> of 7 calendar days for completing the rectification is <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">practicable</mark>.
- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Fail to comply with AI</mark>
	- If the Contractor fails to comply with the instruction within a reasonable time, the Architect may issue a <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">notice reminding</mark> the Contractor to comply. Only if the Contractor does <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">not begin to comply</mark> with AI within 7 calendar days under SFBC cl.4.3(3), may the Employer <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">employer others</mark> to execute the work and make an appropriate deduction from the Contract Sum. Therefore, there should be an instruction followed by a notice. Employer has <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">no right to engage others to carry out the rectification base on the instruction alone</mark>.
- Other bonus
	- Under SFBC <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.4.3(3)</mark>, if the Contractor <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">disagrees</mark> that the Architect's Instructio is valid, he may within 7 days of receipt of that instruction require the disagreement to be resolved following the settlement of dispute cl.41. However, there is no time bar to raising the disagreement. The Contractor should more diplomatically write to the Architect to <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">request for correction of AI</mark>. Only if the Architect <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">refuses to correct that cl.41</mark> needs to be used.
	- The Contractor should also argue that the stains and scratches on the door handle are <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">minor defects</mark> which should <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">not affect the certification of substantial completion</mark>.

### A refuse to issue AI for design conflict *(2022 D2Q1)*

- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Architect's discretion to issue or not issue AI</mark> 
	- Contractor is obliged to carry out the Works in accordance with the Contract Drawings and Specification under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.2.1(1)</mark>
	- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contract Drawings and Specification are prepared by or under the discretion of or at the request of the Architect</mark> under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Articles of Agreement</mark> 
	- Architect has the obligation to <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">provide further drawings and specification</mark> necessary for the execution of the works under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">clause 5.6(1)</mark>
	- Contractor has <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">no right to carry out work involving a Variation without a written instruction</mark> from the Architect or confirmation of an oral instruction from the Contractor except in the event of emergency under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">clause 13.1(3)</mark>
	- By <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">definition</mark>, a Variation includes a change instructed by Architect to the design, quality or quantity of the works. He may or may not change but if he requires a change, he must instruct. There is <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">no discretion</mark>. (<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.1.6</mark>)
	- If Architect's design does not work due to design conflict, the Architect <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">must change the design to make it work and this requires a Variation with instruction</mark>
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Contractor's own proposal</mark>
	- It is <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">usual</mark> for the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contract Bills or Specification to supplement that a Contractor's proposal to change</mark> the design, quality or quantity of the works shall be <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">approved by the Architect and shall be deemed to have no cost or time effect</mark>.
	- If there is <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">no such provision</mark>, the Contractor is <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">not allowed to change</mark>. Any such change shall be regarded as a non-conformance. If the Architect subsequently <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">accepts such non-conformance, there will be no cost or time effect</mark>.
	- Bonus: <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contractors usually carry out oral instructions without waiting for formal</mark> written instructions. They do so <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">at their peril</mark>. They should have waited till the issue of the formal written instructions.
	- Bonus: SFBC have the mechanism for the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">confirmation by Contractor of oral instructions</mark> by Architect but Contractor is <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">not obliged to do so</mark>.
	- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Usually the Contractor's proposal is to improve buildability</mark> or resolve problems in sourcing materials. If the Contractor intends that his proposal should have <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cost or time effect</mark>, he <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">must state so when submitting the proposal</mark>.
	- Contractor when suggesting changes to the Architect's design must be <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">very careful to ensure that his suggestion will not be interpreted as a Contractor's proposal</mark>.
	- Bonus: Uncertainty usually arises when the design or <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">design development is to be undertaken by the Contractor</mark>, and the Architect makes changes during the shop drawings commenting process. <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Whether a comment constitutes a Variation must be clarified</mark> before the materials are ordered in accordance with the shop drawings,
	- <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">In the present case</mark>, the design was provided by Architect. It should be demonstrated that the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">suggestion was to resolve a conflict in the Architect's design</mark>. If the process has not been well documented, the fact of a design conflict should still be easily proved.
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Contractor's responsibility to inform any discrepancy in the Contract Doc</mark>
	- Contractor shall inform the Architect (only) if he finds any ambiguity or discrepancy in or divergence between the documents forming part of the Contract and further documents issued by Architect during the carrying out of the works. If Architect agrees with the Contractor, he shall issue an instruction to resolve. If the resolution requires Variation, the instruction shall so required (<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">cl.2.4</mark>)
	- The resolution of the present design conflict is an <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">instruction requiring Variation</mark>
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Contractor's responsibility to comply with statutory requirements</mark>
	- Contractor is obliged to comply with statutory requirements under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">clause 6.1</mark>.
	- However, this obligation is founded on the premise that the Architect's design of the works is in compliance with the statutory requirements. If it does not, Architect shall issue an instruction to resolve. If the resolution requires a Variation, the instruction shall so require under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">clause 6.2</mark>.
	- If the Architect's design does comply, but the design does not work due to design conflict, the Architect must change the design to make it work and this requires a <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Variation with instruction</mark>.
- As transpired from the above, <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">none of the Architect's allegations can support his refusal of issuing an instruction</mark> to resolve the design conflict of the underground drainage system