---
modified: 02/05/2025
---

Dear Sirs,

We refer to your fax to our office dated xxxx regarding the apparent delay in the lift installation and granite work.

We would like to advise as follows:-

1. Lift Installation
	- The lift installation is carried out under a Nominated Sub-Contract between MC and NSC. NSC is a <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Nominated Sub-Contractor to MC and has no direct contractual relationship with the Employer</mark>.
	- Should there be actual delay to the Main Contract Works due to the default of the lift NSC, the resource for <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">remedy to the Employer will be the imposition of liquidated damages under the MC </mark>on the period of delay beyond the original contract completion date as certified by the Architect. Accordingly, the<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;"> MC shall be primarily liable for the payment of LD</mark> for default of lift NSC since <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">no relieve by EOT grantable</mark> for delay on the part of NSC has been made available under the contract conditions.
	- However, under <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">clause 29 of MC conditions </mark>and clause xx of Specification Preliminaries of the Sub-Contract, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">MC shall be reimbursed by the NSC</mark> the amount of LD payable by the MC due to the period if so caused by the NSC as certified by the Architect.
	- Therefore, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">lift NSC shall be ultimately held responsible for the LD</mark> due to the delay so caused by themselves. In this respect, we would like to draw your attention to the fact that as agreed by the Employer and stated in the Letter of Award in lift NSC, the liability for LD imposable on the lift NSC is subject to a limit of 10% of the Sub-Contract Sum (i.e. about $650,000). This represents a delay of approximately only 5 days to the MC based on the rate of $120,000 per day for LD as stipulated in MC. <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Since the Employer has accepted this limitation on the Sub-Contractor's liability, the MC's liability for delay caused by the lift NSC shall then be correspondingly limited</mark> to only the above period or not more than a sum of $650,000.

2. Granite Installation
	- The granite works are to be carried out under items with prime cost rates specified in the Bills of Quantities which allow the Architect / Employer to select the appropriate sub-contractor for the works. The sub-contractor selected is regarded as <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">domestic sub-contractor</mark> for the works <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">with no contractual relationship with the Employer</mark>.
	- Accordingly, if there is actual delay to the MC Works due to the default of the granite sub-contractor, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">MC shall be primarily held responsible for the payment of LD</mark> to the Employer as aforesaid. Any reimbursement to the MC by the sub-contractor is <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">solely the domestic agreement between themselves and not necessarily the concern of the Employer.</mark>

3. <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Assessment of delay</mark>
	- In establishing whether any event due to the default of the Contractor has caused delay to the contract works and thus led to the imposition of LD, the following points should be considered:-
		- (a) The event lies in the critical path of the construction programme.
		- (b) The event is solely due to the default of the contractor. Should the event be a combination or knock-on effect of incidents which the Employer / Consultants are partly responsible, the net effect due to the Contractor's sole liability should be ascertained.
		- (c) There is actual (not apparent) delay to the contract works caused by the event.
	- The original programme submitted by the contractor and accepted by your office may be useful reference to act as a basis for comparison with the actual works progress including the submission of shop drawings, etc. Consideration should be made for effects on the Contractor's programme and therefore actual works progress due to the Consultant's actions such as issue of AI etc as highlighted in item (b) above. The actual delay caused solely by the Contractor's default is <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">subject to the assessment and adjudication by your office</mark>.

We trust the above have clarified the issue. If you have any further queries, please contract us.