---
modified: 30/04/2025
---

Dear Architect,

With reference to the above project and your letter dated xxxx regarding the proposed issue of instructions, we would like to comment as follows:-

1. If a variation necessary for the completion of the works is required, it <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">should be issued irrespective of the timing within the contract period</mark>.
2. In the current situation, it would appear that these particular instructions<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;"> could not have been issued earlier, due to the on site progress</mark> of the Contractor. If this is the case, then these instructions should be issued.
3. Pursuant to clause 25.3(6) of the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Conditions of Contract</mark>, you shall make in writing <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">a fair and reasonable EOT to the Contractor by issuance of AI</mark>. With respect to the consequences of these instructions, we would note that from your letter you claim these variations will take a week to carry out. If this is the case, then the Contractor would be <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">entitled to an EOT corresponding to this one week delay</mark>.
4. For the purposes of establishing the extended completion date, it is generally accepted that this proposed week EOT would be <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">added to the previously extended completion date</mark>. In short, the Employer would <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">not entitled to recover LD</mark> for this week period.
5. The <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contractor would claim</mark> that the time will set "at large". If so, his obligation will be complete the works in a reasonable time and at a reasonable cost, and the Employer will lose the right to claim LD. Alternatively, the Contractor would claim to add the time to the date of instruction instead of extended completion date. Both of which <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">can be rejected by referring to  case law</mark>. 
6. In the meantime, we would suggest you to issue <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Non-Completion Certificate</mark> in order to reserve the right to deduct the liquidated and ascertained damage.

Should you have any query, please let us know.