---
modified: 30/04/2025
---

Dear Architect,

With reference to the above project and your letter dated xxxx regarding the proposed issue of instructions, we would like to comment as follows:-

1. Generally, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contractor is entitled to show</mark> an enhanced completion date, although this is his benefit, and would<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;"> not be a revised obligation on the Employer or project team</mark>.
2. In view of the above, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Contractor can certainly request information and details from the Architect at an earlier time </mark>and in general the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Architect should endeavour</mark> to release the necessary information in line with the progress of the Works on Site. 
3. One <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">exception</mark> would be where information is specifically <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">stated in the Contract</mark> as being made available on a certain date. There would be no revised obligation for the project team to release this information early.
4. One of the major disadvantages, from the project teams point of view, that this enhanced programme generates is that <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">variations issued may have a greater impact</mark> on the overall progress than would have been the case had the original programme been used. 
5. Based upon the above, the Contractor's argument is considered to be incorrect in so far as it relates to placing any revised obligations on the project team.
6. The Employer's argument is also not strictly correct. While the fact that there is a two week reduction in the programme means that the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">original completion date could still be maintained </mark>even though instruction were issued, it does not mean that the Employer is entitled to disrupt the progress of the Works without any contractual consequences.
7. If the completion date is shortened, the <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Site can be handed over to Employer earlier</mark>, and the Employer shall <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">provide care and security at his cost</mark> after handover. 
8. Finally, the early completion shall obtain <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">consent from NSC</mark>. It is usually accepted that the period of <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">float in a Contractor's programme is for use by all parties</mark>. It would be unfair to deduct time from NSC without their consent, as there is risk of LD by shortening the completion time.  

Should you have any query, please let us know.